What is the WP34S?

In 2009 a group of people began to write the firmware for their
vision of the ultimate RPN scientific programmable calculator, using
the recently-released HP20b and 30b as the platform. Unlike many
open-source projects this one reached completion, has excellent
documentation, and an excellent user interface. Versions exist not
just for the intended hardware but 
for Windows, Linux, and iOS. Those who prefer to use a physical
calculator need to obtain a HP20b or 30b calculator (no longer
manufactured), apply stickers and overlays to the keyboard, and then
flash the firmware. Many (hundreds?) of people have done this and some
are probably enjoying their calculator to this day. However, the
limits of the original hardware (RAM, flash memory, and
display) limited what could be achieved.

The availablity of the far more capabable DM42 hardware led to the
genesis of the WP43S (and WP43C) projects. At this time great progress
has been made (the WP43C code can be loaded and used on DM42 hardware
without the need for a keyboard overlay - try it!) but completion is
still some way ahead. However, simpler projects will run just as
well. One example is the SDKDemo scientific calculator provided by
SwissMicros; another is the WP34S.

Introduction

If you've never used the WP34S before you need to read the manual. The latest
version available in the public domain (though not open-source?) is
v3.1, to be found in the doc folder of the firmware and online in
various places.

This implementation of the WP34S resembles the original as closely as
possible. The main difference is with the keyboard - different key
labels, only one shift key, but an extra row of menu keys. Most keys
(unshifted and shifted) do what their label would lead you to
expect. Functions not shown on the DM42 keyboard are available from
catalogues (as in the original WP34S) or menus (a new feature here).

Outside of alpha mode there are two shift states: f-shift (one press
of the shift key) and g-shift (two presses). In alpha mode there are
still five (or is it six?) shift states - but the letters shown on the
DM42 keyboard are honoured.

Catalogues and Menus

The WP34S has a huge number of functions, far too many (even with
three shift keys) to fit on any sensible keyboard. Those not on the
keyboard are accessible through catalogues: e.g., the P.FCN cataloge
on f-shift 3. You use the up and down arrows followed by XEQ to choose
something; alphabetic keys help you to find something quickly.

Menus use the function keys (unshifted and f-shifted) to provide
access to WP34S keyboard functions that aren't on
the DM42 keyboard. In all menus F5 and F6 provide the
right-arrow and CPX keys present on the WP34S.

Selecting the same menu twice gets rid of it.

Shift-hold up-arrow goes to the previous menu.

In general, an f-shifted key that doesn't have a direct function
(e.g., MODE) leads to a relevant menu, while the g-shifted version of
the key leads to a relevant catalogue, if there is one.

Unshifted keys

These do what they say on the key. Note that sigma+, 1/x, sqrt(x) and
LOG call the labels A, B, C, and D respectively if those labels exist
in the current program. (If they do, the unshifted function is
available as the g-shifted key.)

f-shifted keys

COMPLEX - alternative to CPX key.
MODES - modes menu (angular modes, R<>P conversions, HYP, HMS and H.d).
DISP - display mode menu (All, Fix, Sci, Eng, fractions, radix choice,
HMS and H.d).
CLEAR - clear menu (current program, statistics registers,
x-register).
SOLVER - enters the SLV command.
INTEGRAL - enters the "integrate" command.
MATRIX - displays the Matrix Catalogue.


g-shifted keys

Alpha mode
